1.  Update your KWL chart.
1. Simulate a more computationally intensive program using the `sleep` function in C and compare the time of a threaded vs single threaded (ie serial, no intentional threading) version of the program. Include your two programs and the bash script to show how you tested it with notes on the performance in {index}`threaded.md` (to better illustrate the impact of the threads)
1. Learn about the system libraries in two languages (one can be C or Python, one must be something else). Find the name(s) of the library or libraries. In {index}`systeminteraction.md` summarize what types of support are shared or different?  What does that tell you about the language?
2.  Research examples of programs using multi-threading besides splitting up a single calculation for time reasons, include three examples in {index}`whymultithread.md`.


## Questions



### What kind of tools did you use for a software defined radio?

I worked with matlab batch processing implemented the processing of the data from scratch with C.  

### Will RAID ever be 100% fail proof?

RAID configurations can be data failure proof as long as not too many drives die at the same time and that they are all replaced as soon as they fail. 

### Is the clock speed of a computer how fast the clock goes on and off? and is there ever an error that occours if the clock speed goes too slow?

It is the frequency of the clock signal we will learn more about next week. 

### Do you think this area in computer science/software engineering is harder than other fields like data science or web development?


I think they're just different. Working with hardware is certainly a different pace.  


### Can these different types of ram not be included or are they in every computer?

most modern computers have cache, RAM, ROM, and solid state storage. these are implemented with different types of physical memory. 


### If a computer has extensive resources would it be more effcient to never use DRAM and only use SRAM?

This might be possible, but I am not sure. 

### What is EEPROM?

Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only memory


### How does knowing the hardware/internal components of the computer help improve one's understanding of what they're trying to achieve as a developer for something like a program?

It helps you think through how abstractions work and understanding what actually happens will help you deign more efficient code. 

### How much would it cost to fix a cable that a whale found itself tangled in?


the cable is mostly burried.  It gets damaged mostly by anchors of ships. 


### Is ROM still used in modern computers?

Only for the very beginning of the boot sequence, but yes. 

### When does a kind of storage become absolete? 

That is a good question, but I do not have a precise answer. 

### When they go down to set the transatlantic cable how long does it take to get them back up?

I do not know this and a quick search did not yeild results.  Finding this is worth a commnity badge (could be expanded to an explore).