3. Analyze the xor hashing algorithm in the notes to determine which properties of a cryptographic hash are/not met. Include your analysis in {index}`xorhash.md`
4. find 2 more real world examples of using other number systems (either different bases or different symbols and bases) **not mentioned in class** that are currently used. Describe the number system and its usage in {index}`numbers.md`. Include links to your sources and be sure that the sources are trustworthy. 
5. Calculate the maximum number of git objects that a repo can have without requiring you to use more than the minimum number of characters to refer to any object and include that number in  {index}`gitcounts_scenarios.md`  with a title `# Git counts`. Describe 3 scenarios that would get you to that number of objects in terms of what types of objects would exist. For example, what is the maximum number of commits you could have without exceeding that number, how many files could you have? How could you get to that number of objects in the fewest number of commits? What might be a typical way to get there? Assume normal git use with porcelain commands, not atypical cases with plubming commands. *If you get stuck, outline what you know and then request a review.* 
1. Read about the Learn more about the [SHA-1 collision attach](https://shattered.io/) 
2. Learn more about how git is working on changing from SHA-1 to SHA-256 and answer the transition questions below {index}`gittransition.md`


## gittransition
```
# transition questions

1. Why make the switch? (in detail, not just *an attack*)
2. What impact will the switch have on how git works?
3. Which developers will have the most work to do because of the switch?
```