# Support

## Academic Enhancement Center

Academic Enhancement Center (for undergraduate courses): Located in Roosevelt Hall, the AEC offers free face-to-face and web-based services to undergraduate students seeking academic support. Peer tutoring is available for STEM-related courses by appointment online and in-person. The Writing Center offers peer tutoring focused on supporting undergraduate writers at any stage of a writing assignment. The UCS160 course and academic skills consultations offer students strategies and activities aimed at improving their studying and test-taking skills. Complete details about each of these programs, up-to-date schedules, contact information and self-service study resources are all available on the
 [AEC website](https://web.uri.edu/aec).

- **STEM Tutoring** helps students navigate 100 and 200 level math, chemistry, physics, biology, and other select STEM courses. The STEM Tutoring program offers free online and limited in-person peer-tutoring this fall. Undergraduates in introductory STEM courses have a variety of small group times to choose from and can select occasional or weekly appointments. Appointments and locations will be visible in the TutorTrac system on September 14th, FIXME. The TutorTrac application is available through [URI Microsoft 365 single sign-on](https://account.activedirectory.windowsazure.com/r#/applications) and by visiting aec.uri.edu. More detailed information and instructions can be found on the [AEC tutoring page](https://uri.edu/aec/tutoring).
- **Academic Skills Development** resources helps students plan work, manage time, and study more effectively. In Fall FIXME, all Academic Skills and Strategies programming are offered both online and in-person. UCS160: Success in Higher Education is a one-credit course on developing a more effective approach to studying. Academic Consultations are 30-minute, 1 to 1 appointments that students can schedule on Starfish with Dr. David Hayes to address individual academic issues. Study Your Way to Success is a self-guided web portal connecting students to tips and strategies on studying and time management related topics. For more information on these programs, visit the [Academic Skills Page](https://uri.edu/aec/academic-skills)  or contact Dr. Hayes directly at davidhayes@uri.edu.  
- The **Undergraduate Writing Center** provides free writing support to students in any class, at any stage of the writing process: from understanding an assignment and brainstorming ideas, to developing, organizing, and revising a draft. Fall 2020 services are offered through two online options: 1) real-time synchronous appointments with a peer consultant (25- and 50-minute slots, available Sunday - Friday), and 2) written asynchronous consultations with a 24-hour turn-around response time (available Monday - Friday). Synchronous appointments are video-based, with audio, chat, document-sharing, and live captioning capabilities, to meet a range of accessibility needs. View the synchronous and asynchronous schedules and book online, visit uri.mywconline.com.
