---
file_format: mystnb
kernelspec:
    name: python3
---


# How do I choose a Programming Language for a project?
+++

Today we'll explore how programming languages are cateogrized. Along the way, this will expose what core, generic features of a programming language are.  

+++

The key takeaway that I want for your is to have intution for how to choose a language for a project, not only your favorite, but what is the best for different types of projects.


+++

## Admin

This is a posted class with opportunities for Experience, Review, and Practice badges.  The practice badge also has ideas in it for an explore badge.  

This is a fully asynchronous activity that you can complete alone and has options for how to dicuss it with classmates. You can choose either version. 

```{important}
Future classes do not directly build on top of steps in this activity so this can be made up later without putting you behind. 
```

+++




## Set up for credit 

Start your experience badge at the start of working on this activity and then you can add your work to it throughout.  

You may work alone or with classmates. 

```{important}
 Use the makeup workflow with an [ISO formated date](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) (YYYY-MM-DD). 
```

```{important}
This PR should auto-request @brownsarahm; do not change it
``` 


+++


##  Comparing languages you know

Tak a few minutes on your own to fill in the follwing table for two languages of your own. Replace the `<langugage>` with two languages that you are familiar with. Add two additional rows. You can do this by memory, or by looking up/discussing. If you look things up, be sure to use reputable sources and include links to them. 

```
| feature | <language> | <language></language> |
| ------ | ------ | ------ |
| use of whitespace     | Text     | Text     |
| list/array types |   | |
| variable typing |  | | 
| memory usage | | | 
```


Post your table  on [GitHub in the language comparisons discussion]([)](https://github.com/orgs/compsys-progtools/discussions/10). Reply to at least two peers offering either advice or asking additional questions.  

```{note}
Link to your post and comments in your experience PR
```

## Learn more

Skim through these resources:  
- [intro to PL](https://www3.cs.stonybrook.edu/~pfodor/courses/CSE260/_L01_Introduction_Programming_Languages.pdf)
- [categorizing progrmaming languages](https://cs.lmu.edu/~ray/notes/pltypes/)

While you read look for the following key points: 
- What other properties besides the syntax and efficiency criteria above can you use to compare programming languages
- how do types vs paradigms compare as ways to categorize languages
- how do interpretation and compilation compare?


## PL in Developer Survey

+++

Read Carefully the [developer survey// languages section](https://insights.stackoverflow.com/survey)
for 2023 (2024 will not occur until late spring/early summer)

+++



Include answers to the following questions in your experience report for today. You may work with classmates and use additional sources to find answers to these questions.  If they are not basic facts about the langague (eg compiled vs interpretted; open source vs not; libarary ecosystem) include links to where you found the information. 

- what is surprising?
- what did you expect?
- what do the popular languages have in common?
- what do the dreaded languages have in common?
- How are popular vs dreaded languages different? What features might be the cause for making a language dreaded?
- How to used languages differ from less commonly used languages? What features might be the cause for making a languge popular? 
- How have things changed over the years of the survey?  



## Prepare for next class 

```{include} ../_prepare/2024-02-22.md
```

## Badges

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} Review
```{include} ../_review/2024-02-20.md
```

````

````{tab-item} Practice
```{include} ../_practice/2024-02-22.md
```
````
`````


## Experience Report Evidence

If in class you should have the alternate file we made.  If for makeup, your report should have all of the content above. 

## Questions After Today's Class 

```{important}
These questions are from past semesters, you can add your own via a PR to the course website for a community badge or leave it in your experience report and I will add it later
```

### Is it possible to only work with one language and never even consider using other languages?

Maybe if you work at one company forever, but not easy. 

### Are deep learning libraries that are changed from python to another language open source?

It's not so much that they're changed from Python to other langauges as far as I know.  For example tensorflow has a C++ API and the optimized parts of it are written in C++.  It is a Python library, but more than [half of the content in the repo is C++](https://github.com/tensorflow/tensorflow).  It is open source though. 


### What typically makes languages go obsolete?

Some stay necessary in a small sense forever (as far as we have experienced so far) because something critical is written in it. For example [COBOL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/COBOL#Isolation_from_the_computer_science_community) has been basically considered irrelevant by computer scientists the whole time, but it is still what [95% of ATM swipes rely on](https://fingfx.thomsonreuters.com/gfx/rngs/USA-BANKS-COBOL/010040KH18J/index.html).

More often I would say a language might never become popular and then becoe obsolete or a version of a language can become obsolete. 

More research on this is a good explore badge. 

### Is it worthwhile to learn how Docker works in order to be more employable?

Docker is worth learning.  

### How often should I be weighing my options for the programming language I'm going to use for a project?

If you are starting a project from scratch it is worth thinking about it. 

### What class would give you a license to MATLAB so you can get experience for professional use?


Here is [URI's MATLAB](https://its.uri.edu/services/945d672c1dc20ce895a496473abc9dc42c2f55f411/) access information.  You do not need to be in a specific class. 