
---
file_format: mystnb
kernelspec:
    name: python3
---


+++{"lesson_part": "main"}
# How do different types of storage work together?



+++{"lesson_part": "main","type":"heading"}

## Why do we need to know about this? 


- computers are not magic and edge cases help you see that
- in case you want to do high performance programming
- it's good practice with abstraction 




+++{"lesson_part": "main","type":"heading"}

## Hardware vs Software abstraction


Abstraction is to remove details and use higher level units 



[abstraction layers]()


+++{"lesson_part": "main"}


in hardware our abstractions are less leaky becuase it is less forgiving.  

software abstractions can suffer from leaks; think git- it's hard to learn because the abstraction is leaky. 



+++{"lesson_part": "main"}


a lot of programming is *designing* abstractions, to get good at making something, you study examples first- good and bad- to learn what to do, and not to do. 


+++{"lesson_part": "main"}

[leaky abstractions](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/2002/11/11/the-law-of-leaky-abstractions/)


- the above is a blog post by one of the co-founders and the 2010-2019 CEO of Stack Overflow [Joel Spolsky](https://www.joelonsoftware.com/about-me/)


+++{"lesson_part": "main","type":"heading"}

## How to store a value 



+++{"lesson_part": "main"}


We need a few more components: 

- [mux](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=mux) select one of two values
- [flip-flop](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#) hold a value until told otherwise




+++{"lesson_part": "main"}


[register](https://lodev.org/logicemu/#id=register)



+++{"lesson_part": "main"}


this gives us SRAM which can hold a value as long as the system has power 
(1963)



+++{"lesson_part": "main","type":"heading"}

## another way to physically store a value 


+++{"lesson_part": "main"}


DRAM uses one transistor and one capacitor. (SRAM uses 4-6 transistors)

a capacitor holds a charge for a time, but gradually fades, so it has to be refreshed



+++{"lesson_part": "main"}

ROM is a diode matrix traditionally
- hardward encodes the instructions
- cannot be changed without rewiring

+++{"lesson_part": "main"}

PROM
- can be reprogrammed once after device is made
- used for firmware/microcode

+++{"lesson_part": "main"}
EPROM or EEPROM
- treated like ROM
- can be erased & reprogrammed
- but not infinitely, very limited number of tmes
- holds value when power goes away, UV light or electriciy can re-program
-  

+++{"lesson_part": "main"}

SRAM:

- is volatile; it needs power to hold a value
- is fast 
- takes up more space on the chip (uses 4-6 transistors per bit)
- typically used of cache and internal registers
+++{"lesson_part": "main"}

DRAM: 
- is volatile;  it needs power to hold a value
- is slower and requires a refresh
- is small (1 transistor + 1 capacitor per bit) and space efficient
- used for the main RAM
+++{"lesson_part": "main"}

Flash memory 
- non-volatile; holds a value without power, can be electircally erased and re-programmed
- comprised of memory "cells" in layerd boards
- memory cells are mosfets - a different type of transistor that retains a state after power is removed and put bag
- implemented with EEPROM 
- designed for large blocks and limited writes (~10k)
- used for ssd, usb flash drives, smartphones, etc
- slow to write, fast to read




## Prepare for Next Class 

```{include} ../_prepare/2024-04-23.md
```

## Badges

`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} Review
```{include} ../_review/2024-04-18.md
```

````

````{tab-item} Practice
```{include} ../_practice/2024-04-18.md
```

````
`````



## Experience Report Evidence

## Questions After Today's Class 

### What makes magnetic disk storage like HDDs more cost efficient than NAND flash storage like SSDs?

it is cheaper to manufacture 

### Do different types of connections significantly impact data speeds? 

the bandwidth can for certain.  More on this is a good explore

### Can the fact that data is not erased just the pointer to the file name is removed impact performance?

In electromechanical disks it is called [fragmentation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defragmentation) and requires fixing. 

For SSDs, however that is actually better the nonconsecutive and defragmentation is not worth it, because it is additional wear on the drive. 

### What sort of storage is best for very long storage?

Tape drives or even CDs can be good.  This type of storate is called cold storage.  Learning more about cold storage is a good explore. 

### How does memory differ from when there were disks and cds to now with the internet?

RAM is unimpacted by that, but we need less removable storage because we can transfer information over the internet. 

### What makes caches faster than long term memory? One aspect is because it's closer to the CPU, but is there a different way they store data?

cache is implemented with the faster SRAM generally instead of DRAM. 

### When a file is updated how are the edits stored back on disk? Is the entire file contents rewritten to the disk or is only the edited part updated?

Could be either depending on needs and the type of writing. 

### why is RAM much more expensive than storage.

More expensive materials and manufacturing process. 

### Why are there so many different types of memory? Cant technically only one of them be used for everything?

They all have various tradeoffs. Some are faster, but expensive or maybe space consuming, others might be slow but space effective. 

### What are the different types of RAM and what does RAM do?

RAM is the main memory that holds values you are computing with. 

the different types are contrasted above. 


### Is it very expensive for companies to invest in these data storage units?

Building from scratch? yes. Getting a small share? no. 