---
file_format: mystnb
kernelspec:
    name: python3
---

# Working offline 


## Why do we need this for computer systems?


### Computer Systems are designed by people

+++

Computer Science is not a natural science like biology or physics where we try
to understand some aspect of the world that we live in.  Computer Science as a
discipline, like algorithms, mostly derives from Math.  

+++


So, when we study computer science, while parts of it are limited by physics, most of it is essentially an
imaginary world that is made by people.  Understanding how people think, both
generally, and common patterns within the community of programmers can help us
understand how things work and why they are the way they are.  The *why* can also
make it easier to remember things, or, it can help you know what things you can find
alternatives for, or even where you might invent a whole new thing that is
better in some way.  

+++


 Of course, not *all* programmers think the same way, but when
people spend time together and communicate, they start to share patterns in how
they think. So, while you do **not** have to think the same way as these patterns,
knowing what they are will help you reading code, and understanding things.  


### Context Matters



This context of how things were developed can influence how we understand it.
We will also talk about the history of computing as we go through different
topics in class so that we can build that context up.  

+++

### Optimal is relative

The "best" way to do something is always relative to the context.  "Best" is a
vague term.  It could be most computationally efficient theoretically,
fastest to run on a particular type of hardware, or easiest for another programmer
to read.  

+++
## Let's get organized 


+++


For class you should have a folder on your computer where you will keep all of your materials. 


+++

We will start using the terminal today, by getting all set up. 

+++


Open a terminal window.  I am going to use `bash` commands

- if you are on mac, your default shell is `zsh` which is mostly the same as bash for casual use. you can switch to bash to make your output more like mine using the command `bash` if you want, but it is not required. 
- if you are on windows, your **GitBash** terminal will be the least setup work to use `bash`
- if you have WSL (if you do not, no need to worry) you should be able to set your linux shell to `bash`

+++


On mac you can optionally use the `bash` command to switch to bash.
```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
bash
```

```{code-block} console

The default interactive shell is now zsh.
To update your account to use zsh, please run `chsh -s /bin/zsh`.
For more details, please visit https://support.apple.com/kb/HT208050.
```

Then it tells you Apple's default is somethign else and how to switch back. 



We can use `pwd` you can see your current "location". It stands for  **p**rint **w**orking **d**irectory. 


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
pwd
```

````{margin}
```{note}
these terms link to the site glossary
```
````
this is called the {term}`path` and specifically this is an {term}`absolute path`, we can tell because it starts with `/` that is the "root" or "top" of the directory tree structure. 

```{code-block} console
/Users/brownsarahm
```

```{tip}

You can think of absolute paths like a street address.  It describes the location in a general (absolute) way; not relative to another location.  

I can say Tyler hall is at 9 Greenhouse Road and you can get there from anywhere. 

In contrast if I say it is that building in the distance, across the quad past the large glass building, that works from our classroom in Ranger, but not from the library, or anywhere off campus. This would be a relative set of directions to get to Tyler Hall. 

```


We can change into another directory with  `cd` for **c**hange **d**irectory 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd Documents/
```

We can use a the {term}`relative path` to describe where we want to change to. The `Documents/` is a relative path because it does not start with `/`

To see what changed, we use `pwd` again

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
pwd
```

```{code-block} console
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents
```
Note that the current path is the same as the old one plus the place we changed to. 

I moved one step further into my inclass folder


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd inclass/
```
 
We can **m**a**k** a new **dir**ectory with `mkdir`



```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
mkdir systems
```


What you want to have is a folder for class (mine is systems) in a place you can find it. (mine is in my inclass folder)


## Your Home directory is easy to get to

Next we will use `cd` without path at all. 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd 
```

Here we noted that the prompt changed back to what we started with, the `~`. The home directory. 

Next we will go back to where we were working.  


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd Documents/inclass/systems/
```

Remember, you can use {kbd}`tab` to completed.  So I typed: 
`cd Doc` {kbd}`tab` `in` {kbd}`tab` `sys` {kbd}`tab`

This saves time **and** reduces typos, the terminal is filling in based on what the available options are, what exists in your filesystem, it will not fill in with something that is not there. 

## Relative paths

Let's look at our current location again: 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
pwd
```

```{code-block} console
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass/systems
```


`..` is a special file that points to a specific relative path, of one level up.  
We can use `..` to go up one level from wherever we are.

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd ..
```

we can see the impact using `pwd`

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
pwd
```

```{code-block} console
/Users/brownsarahm/Documents/inclass
```
Notice that before the last part was systems and the new path is missing that last part. 

We will go back to the folder we made, since that is where we want to work for class. 


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd systems/
```



## A toy repo for in class

```{warning}
I removed the link from the public notes, but you can get it in prismia
```

**this repo will be for *in class* work, you will not get feedback inside of it, unless you ask, but you will answer questions in your kwl repo about what we do in this repo sometimes** 

**only work in this repo during class time** or making up class, unless specifically instructed to (will happen once in a few weeks)


After you have the repo, run the one action that is there. 

Then find your readme issue and note its number, and copy the template for the README.  

From the code tab, create a new file called README.md and paste in the template. 

Commit the changes directly to main with `start readme closes #` and the number of your issue as the message, mine was `start readme closes #3`. 

This will close the issue. 


## Connecting with GitHub 


We have two choices to Download a repository:
1. clone to maintain a link using git
1. download zip to not have to use git, but have no link

we want option 1 beacuse we are learning git



### Authenticating with GitHub



There are many ways to authenticate securely with GitHub and other git clients.  We're going to use *easier* ones for today, but we'll come back to the third, which is a bit more secure and is a more general type of authentication.


1. ssh keys (we will do this later)
1. `gh` CLI / gitscm in GitBash through browser

### Windows (gitbash)

- `git clone` and paste your URL from GitHub
- then follow the prompts, choosing to authenticate in Browser. 

### MacOS X

- GitHub CLI: enter `gh auth login` and follow the prompts.
- then `git clone` and paste your URL from github
 
### If nothing else works
Create a [personal access token](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token). This is a special one time password that you can use like a password, but it is limited in scope and will expire (as long as you choose settings well). 

Then proceed to the clone step. You may need to configure an identity later with [`git config`](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-First-Time-Git-Setup)


### Cloning a repo

````{margin}
```{warning}
You cannot run this one exactly, because you do not have access to my repo, but you can replace the URL with the one from your repo.  

You get the URL from the green code button on the main code tab of your repo.  Make sure the pop up is on the Local tab and https. 
```
````

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git clone https://github.com/compsys-progtools/gh-inclass-sp24-brownsarahm.git
```

then we get several messages back from git and GitHub (the {term}`remote`, it *could* be a different host and a repo can have multiple remotes)
```{code-block} console
Cloning into 'gh-inclass-sp24-brownsarahm'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 8, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (8/8), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (4/4), done.
remote: Total 8 (delta 0), reused 4 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
Receiving objects: 100% (8/8), done.
```

We can see that it made a new folder by looking at what is in our folder. 

We can view what is in a folder with `ls` for **list**

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
ls
```

```{code-block} console
gh-inclass-sp24-brownsarahm
```
It was empty and now it has your repo! 



## What is in a repo?

We can enter that folder

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
cd gh-inclass-sp24-brownsarahm/
```



When we compare the local directory to GitHub


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
ls
```

```{code-block} console
README.md
```


Notice that the `.github/workflows` that we see on GitHub is missing,
that is because it is *hidden*.  All file names that start with `.` are hidden. Hidden files are not protected, they are just lightly hidden to protect a casual user from accidentally editing them.  As a developer, you will likely edit hidden files a lot. 

In this case, the hidden files are **for** GitHub's server, not for local use. 



We can actually see the rest with the `-a` for **all** {term}`option` or *flag*.  Options are how we can modify how a command line program works, mostly they are optional or nonrequired. 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
ls -a
```

```{code-block} console
.		..		.git		.github		README.md
```

Now we see the `.github` folder like we saw on GitHub. 

There is also the `.git` directory.  This folder is for use by the git program. Most simple programs we write in school, run, store all of their values in variables in memory and thn when you restart you make new values.  git, as a program uses that `.git` directory to store all of the information it needs in files. 

We also see some special "files" that we will always see in every location:
-  `.` the current location 
-   `..` up one directory




## How do I know what git knows? 

[`git status`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-status) is your friend. 


Let's see how it works: 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```


this command compares your working directory (what you can see with `ls -a` and all subfolders except the `.git` directorty) to the current state of your `.git` directory. 

this tells us:
-  the branch we are on (`On branch main`)
-  that we have incorporated all changes downloaded from GitHub (`up to date with 'origin/main'`)
-  that our working directory matches what it was after the repo's last commit (`nothing to commit, working tree clean`)



## Making a branch with GitHub.


On your about issue on Github.com, create a branch using the link in the development section of the right side panel. See the [github docs](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/creating-a-branch-for-an-issue) for how to do that. 


Then it gives you two steps to do. We are going to do them one at a time so we can see better what they each do. 


First we will update the `.git` directory without changing the working directory using [git fetch](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-fetch). We have to tell git fetch where to get the data from, we do that using a name of a {term}`remote`. 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git fetch origin
```

```{code-block} console
From https://github.com/compsys-progtools/gh-inclass-sp24-brownsarahm
 * [new branch]      2-create-an-about-file -> origin/2-create-an-about-file
```
then we check status again

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch main
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/main'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Looks like nothing so far. 

Next, we switch to that branch. 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git checkout 2-create-an-about-file
```

```{code-block} console
branch '2-create-an-about-file' set up to track 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.
Switched to a new branch '2-create-an-about-file'
```

and verify what happened
```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Now it shows us the new branch! 



## Creating a file on the terminal

The `touch` command creates an empty file

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
touch about.md
```



```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	about.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

Now we see something new. Git tells us that there is a file in the working directory that it has not been told to track the changes in and it knows nothing.  

It also tells us what we can do next. Under "Untracked files" it gives us advice for how to handle those files specifically. If we had made more than one type of change, there would be multiple subheadings each with their own suggestions. 

The very last line is advice of what do to overall.  

We're going to do a bit more work first though, by adding conent to the file. 

We are going to use the [nano](https://www.nano-editor.org/) text editor to edit the file

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
nano about.md
```

We put some content in the file, any content then saved and exit. 

On the nano editor the `^` stands for control. 

and we can look at the contents of it. 


Now we will check again with git.

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	about.md

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```


In this case both say to `git add` to track or to include in what will be committed.  Under untracked files is it says `git add <file>...`, in our case this would look like `git add about.md`.  However, remember we learned that the `.`  that is always in every directory is a special "file" that points to the current directory, so we can use that to add **all** files. Since we have only one, the two are equivalent, and the `.` is a common shortcut, because most of the time we want to add everything we have recently worked on in a single commit.   


`git add` puts a file in the "staging area" we can use the staging area to group files together and put  changes to multiple files in a single commit. This is something we **cannot** do on GitHub in the browser, in order to save changes at all, we have to commit. Offline, we can save changes to our computer without commiting at all, and we can group many changes into a single commit. 


We will use `.` as our "file" to stage everythign in the current working directory. 

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git add .
```

And again, we will check in with git


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/2-create-an-about-file'.

Changes to be committed:
  (use "git restore --staged <file>..." to unstage)
	new file:   about.md

```


Now that one file is marked as a new file and it is in the group "to be committed". Git also tells us how to undo the thing we just did. 

```{admonition} Try this yourself
:class: anchor

Try making a change, adding it, then restoring it. Use git status to see what happens at each point
```
````{margin}
```{important}
If you forget the `-m` you will be put into `vi` or `vim` text editor. Press `a` to enter `~insert" mode (that will appear on the bottom of the terminal window), type your commit message, then press `escape` to exit insert mode. Then type `:wq`and press enter/return  to write(save) and quit.
``` 
````
Next, we will commit the file.  We use `git commit` for this.  the `-m` option allows us to put our commit message dirctly on the line when we commit.  Notice that unlike commiting on GitHub, we do not choose our branch with the `git commit` command.  We have to be "on" that branch before the `git commit`. 


```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git commit -m 'create about file close s #2'
```



```{code-block} console
[2-create-an-about-file 81c6f18] create about file close s #2
 1 file changed, 2 insertions(+)
 create mode 100644 about.md
```

```{warning}
At this point you might get an error or warning about your identity. Follow what git says to either set or update your identity using `git config
```



Remember, the messages that git gives you are designed to try to help you.  The developers of git know it's a complex and powerful tool and that it's hard to remember every little bit.


We again check in with git: 
```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git status
```

```{code-block} console
On branch 2-create-an-about-file
Your branch is ahead of 'origin/2-create-an-about-file' by 1 commit.
  (use "git push" to publish your local commits)

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Now it tells us we have changes that GitHub does not know about. 


We can send them to github with `git push`

```{code-cell} bash
:tags: ["skip-execution"]
git push
```

```{code-block} console
Enumerating objects: 4, done.
Counting objects: 100% (4/4), done.
Delta compression using up to 8 threads
Compressing objects: 100% (2/2), done.
Writing objects: 100% (3/3), 337 bytes | 337.00 KiB/s, done.
Total 3 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
To https://github.com/compsys-progtools/gh-inclass-sp24-brownsarahm.git
   faef6af..81c6f18  2-create-an-about-file -> 2-create-an-about-file
```

This tells us the steps git took to send:
- counts up what is there
- compresses them
- sends them to GitHub
- moves the `2-create-an-about-file` branch on GitHub from commit `3f54148` to commit `57de0cd`
- links the local `2-create-an-about-file` branch to the GitHub `2-create-an-about-file` branch

## Concept Overview

```{note}
In the notes from [last class](conceptmap) I described what this type of diagram is called and how to read it. 

```

```{important}
This is not the only thing that would be correct for the prep work, in the next prepare, you can see if yours *conceptually* matches this even if visualized differntly. 
```

````{margin}
```{note}
It is supposed to be possible to add alt text to mermaid diagrams, but it is not well documented yet.  

they play slightly better with screen readers than, say a flat jpg or even most svgs but not perfect.  If you are interested in working with these see the [issue](https://github.com/compsys-progtools/spring2024/issues/5) and comment to work on it. 
```
````

```{mermaid}
flowchart TD
    shell --> |is used through| terminal
    zsh --> |is an example of a | shell
    bash --> |is an example of a | shell
    powershell --> |is an example of a | shell
    shell --> |interface to | os[Operating system]
    git --> |is a program used through | terminal
```

Another way to think abut things (and adds some additional examples to help you differentiate between categories and examples of categories)

```{mermaid}
flowchart LR
    subgraph programs
    subgraph shell
    bash
    zsh
    powershell
    end
    subgraph vcs[version control systems]
    git
    svn
    mercurial
    end
    end
    subgraph gh[git hosts]
    GitHub
    BitBucket
    GitLab
    end
```

Today's bash commands: 

```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1

* - command
  - explanation
* - `pwd`
  - print working directory
* - `cd <path>`
  - change directory to path
* - `mkdir <name>`
  - make a directory called name
* - `ls`
  - list, show the files
* - `touch`
  - create an empty file
```

We also learned some git commands

```{list-table}
:header-rows: 1

* - command
  - explanation
* - `status`
  - describe what relationship between the working directory and git
* - `clone <url>`
  - make a new folder locally and download the repo into it from url, set up a remote to url
* - `add  <file>`
  - add file to staging area
* - `commit -m 'message'`
  - commit using the message in quotes
* - `push`
  - send to the remote
```


## Prepare for Next Class

```{include} ../_prepare/2024-01-30.md
```

##  Badges


`````{tab-set}
````{tab-item} Review
```{include} ../_review/2024-01-30.md
```

````

````{tab-item} Practice
```{include} ../_practice/2024-01-30.md
```
````
`````

## Experience Report Evidence

If you missed class today, link to your gh-inclass repo in the Experience report PR. 

## Questions After Today's Class 

### can you link an issue to both commits and PRs, or only PRs

both! we did both in today's class.  We closed an issue via commit for the README file and then make a PR with a linked issue for the about.md file. 

### if we want to stage multiple files, can we do that in one command, like git add about.md README.md

Yes! or you can use `.`

### do we do anything with the pull request we just made in the in-class repo?

Leave the about PR open for class on Thursday

### Is mermaid something we will be using just for now, or should I become more familiar with it?

It is useful and we will use it on an off throughout class.  Since GitHub supports it in all markdown, including comments, it is handy to be able to put in a quick diagram to explain something. 

If you like it, it is something you can use even more, for a possible explore badge.  

### What are the benefits of using GitHub locally 

Using git and GitHub locally means you can use your regular devtools and use GitHub as a could copy of your work. 